The most common method of detecting mislabeling is something called DNA barcoding.

If you had a lot of money and time and a sample of tissue, you could sequence the entire genome of a piece of fish that you ordered to figure out what it is. No one has a lot of money and time, though, so what scientists did is standardize on a specific region of the genome to sequence, and they use that as the fingerprint for the entire fish genome.

So I get a sample, I look at that one specific area, and based on what's there, I know what species I'm dealing with.

For example, if we sampled a red snapper, we could get something like this back in terms of base pairs:

http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/Public_RecordView?processid=ANGBF7622-12

Or even this fun "illustrative barcode" which looks pretty cool.

http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/Public_RecordView?processid=ANGBF7622-12

So we go out and we find red snapper, we find yellowtail tuna, we find all of the kinds of fish that show up in sushi bars, and we get their barcodes. Step one, complete.

Then we just go out to supermarkets, or to restaurants, or to sushi bars, and when we buy the meat or when we're served the dish, we just slice a little off to barcode later.

So, you get some red snapper. You barcode it, and you compare it with what you've got it.

BZZT

Nope, never, not red snapper at all, totally impossible.

Study in vancouver of 39 sushi bars - they bought 34 pieces of red snapper, and exactly 3 of them were actually red snapper. The others were mostly tilapia, the cheapest fish you can think of.

Yellowtail - they bought 6, and exactly 1 was real. Most of the salmon and tuna was fine, they ended up with a mislabeling rate of about 22%.

In Brussels another similar study found about 30% mislabeled with bluefin tuna being 95% mislabeled. This time it wasn't tilapia, though, it was just other kinds of tuna.

So part of this issue isj ust "i want to use a cheaper fish," but other parts go a little deeper - for example, let's look at red snapper. 100% mislabeling rate in the Vancouver study, a similar study run in Los Angeles found 89% mislabeling.

There is no red snapper on the west coast. If you go Miami, closer to where red snapper lives, you get a better hit rate - maybe only 40% fake - but there are fish on the west coast that USED to be called red snapper.

Laws and regulations are set up about what you can actually call a fish. According to the California game regulations, this guy here:

Sebastes brevispinis

could be called Pacific red snapper. In fact, he's in a family of 13 fish that could previously be called Pacific red snapper under the California Game Code. But the FDA has a list of what you can call different species, too - called The Seafood List - and under that list you CAN'T call this fish a red snapper. With the FDA it has the sexy name of Silvergray Rockfish.

But if you were hanging out in California, doing some fishing, bringing it up to the dock, selling it to a restaurant, all of that - you can totally call it red snapper, because that's what it's called, and the FDA can't do anything about it. Because the Seafood List is officially called

  FDA's Guide to Acceptable Market Names for Seafood sold in Interstate Commerce

So as long as it doesn't cross state lines, it's all California's laws.

Now, California did change their rules about this one, but trying to juggle common names and overlapping names and things that like is a very very difficult part of labeling sushi.

But people are actively trying to fix this - there's a group operating out of UCLA and LMU in Los Angeles called the Los Angeles Seafood Monitoring Project and they're working really hard to make sure that fish have accurate names.

So, for example, there's a sushi chain called Sugarfish in LA that used to serve snapper from New Zealand. But snapper in New Zealand isn't really snapper here, so they're relabeling it as 'sea bream' - same, just a different, more accurate name. Not that you necessarily have a clue what the difference between all of these fish are, but maybe it'll help a little.